# 0. Foreword



    0.1. Lay people are convinced that the pronunciation of a language and its official spelling are one and the same thing (in spite of some lamented incongruity). This impression derives from the fact that school –to be true– generally only worries about writing, and completely neglects and ignores pronunciation. Society does no better on the whole! Thus, people are irrationally terrified by spelling errors, to which they will be passively subjected without asking themselves any questions.

    The belief of the (almost) ‹natural› correspondence between spelling and pronunciation is merely illusory. But, if spelling can be fairly homogeneous in every nation (at least as far as middle and upper education levels are concerned), this instead is not the case for pronunciation, which is generally more or less regionally marked.



    0.2. Too often, people think that they cannot improve their pronunciation (or their verbal communication). At first, it is not always easy, nor is it evident –although, *afterwards*, it is quite obvious– that each person has a different pronunciation from other people's, not so much –or not only– because of individual peculiarities of voice, due to personal *timbres* (which are determined by the somatic and temperamental characteristics of each person); but, most of all, because of the regional and social characteristics which every person ‹spontaneously› has (unless we have freed ourselves from them, by applying the *phonetic method* since they have been acquired together with the language, as a part of language itself.



    0.3. In general, this English version of the *Handbook* (originally written in Italian, and already published by Lincom Europa) maintains the original structuring, so that a wider readership may discover the *phonetic method*, although examples have been adapted to English, whenever possible.

    However, we are preparing the book *English Pronunciations*, which will be structured from an English point of view. On the other hand, those who can fully master the phonetic method will surely take advantage of it, independently from their mother tongue.



    0.4. Phonetics must not be ‹studied› unwillingly, or mnemonically, as if it were just a useless and thankless toil. On the contrary, it has to be ‹discovered›, while enjoying playing with sounds (and with words, sentences, and texts).

    Although we are hardly aware of it, phonetics is always with us: it is *in* us. In fact, just as chemistry or physics already existed, independently from Man's awareness or will; so is phonetics naturally inevitable, when we speak. Once the laws and principles of chemistry and physics have been discovered, these sciences can be applied in many useful ways. Equally, if we learn to use the categories and principles of phonetics, we can succeed –with spontaneous naturalness– in *recognizing* the different sounds of our own language, including nuances. Later on, we can also manage to *recognize* the sounds of other languages, dialects, and accents. And this will become easier if we are able to apply correctly what phonetics offers freely, with no need of expensive equipments, and with no particular talent: it is sufficient (but necessary) to start to really ‹listen› to the sounds, it is not enough to simply ‹hear› them.

    A very effective help, with this analysis of sounds, is provided by the use of phonetic symbols, which allow us to ‹see› the sounds and then to compare them, by reﬂecting on their similarities and differences.

    Another way to ‹see› the sounds is using appropriate articulatory figures which, besides facilitating reciprocal comparisons, also activate our reﬂection of the movements that occur inside our mouth, when we just produce a given sound. Once we have started, it is surprising to notice that certain sound nuances correspond to given movements (although small). We really wonder why we did not realize such a simple and natural thing earlier. However, it is paramount that we manage to do that, albeit a little late.



    0.5. Schools should endeavor to make this ‹miracle› come true. And, as a result, phonetics will certainly continue to give its useful benefits, in a spontaneous and natural way, whenever it is channeled appropriately, for studying foreign languages, as well as improving one's own national language. It would be sufficient to introduce the basic elements of phonetics, as a game, in the first three months of the first year of primary school, by means of a videotape, or a ᴄᴅ-ʀᴏᴍ, or a multimedia interactive ᴄᴅ, appropriately organized, and with wall boards which show some figures (cf § 0.7) and the most important phonetic symbols, which should be rigorously written in red (and perhaps in [], or //), in order to always distinguish them from ‹normal› spelling, following the *bi-alphabetical principle*, which is part of the phonetic method (of *Natural Phonetics*).

    These materials would also be useful to compensate for the inevitable want of teachers (who have no clear notion at all about phonetics, since –certainly– they have not been prepared for this). But, children themselves would mostly obtain the best results, by amusing themselves while acquiring –without even being aware– the fundamental and necessary key to succeed in usefully separating the phonic level from the written level (as we have already seen during years of experimentations in primary schools). These ‹discoveries› would remain with the children, naturally interiorized, also when they grow up, being able to avoid making the same mistakes as their predecessors did (including teachers).

    As a matter of fact, pronunciation is not a perfidious invention of some phonetics-mad phoneticians, but –indeed– it is the first manifestation of any language, which is certainly not only spelling, grammar, lexicon…



    0.6. The real hump to get over is exactly *non-knowledge*. In fact, what we do not know is considered as completely ‹useless and impossible›. In this connection, the absurd belief comes to mind that certain sounds of given languages are impossible to indicate or describe, since they could only be learned ‹by directly hearing them from a teacher's mouth› (as we still happen to read in quite a few grammars!).

    Let us now see a simple type of transcription, which puts words (and sentences, as well) between slashes. *Phonemic* transcriptions show *phonemes* (or functional sounds) in relation to spelling. We can notice at once that stressed syllables are clearly indicated by the sign /'/, which precedes the consonantal and vocalic segments which form them.

    In a word such as concise, the two *c* s have two different phonic values: /kǝn'saɛs/; whereas the *c* and *s* in the last syllable have exactly the same value. Thus, it is obvious that a transcription is definitely more precise and less ambiguous than traditional spelling, where a *c* generally corresponds to /k/ when it is notfollowed by *i*, *e*, *y*, that is before *a*, *o*, *u*, or before a consonant; but *s* may be either /s/ or /z/ in different positions: *seas* /'sɪiz/, *cease* /'sɪis/. Let us also consider *g*, which can either correspond to /g/ or /ʤ/: *get* /'gɛt/, *gem* /'ʤɛm/; *porgy* /ˈpɔːɹ̣gi/, *orgy* /'ɔːɹ̣ʤi/; while *.gif* can have either phoneme: /'gɪf, 'ʤɪf/.

    Another difference, in comparison with current spelling, will be quite obvious when we consider the following examples, as well: *to live* /'lɪv/, *a live* /'laɛv/ *concert*, *to tie a bow* /'bɔʊ/, *to bow* /'baɔ/ *and scrape*, *a minute* /'mɪnᵻt/, *in minute* /maɛ'nj̣ʊut/ detail, *of no import* /'Impɔːɹ̣t/, *to import* /Im'pɔːɹ̣t/.



    0.7. This handbook of *Natural Phonetics & Tonetics* (*NPT*, which is the fully revised, amended, and updated edition of *A Handbook of Phonetics*, *HPh*, with additions and substitutions, henceforth indicated as *NPT*/*HPh*) provides everything which is needed for doing really useful phonetics. This means *natural* phonetics –that is *articulatory*, *auditory*, and *functional*– with all necessary explanations through articulatory figures for consonants: *orograms* (cf § 3.2.1) of all articulations (and some *palatograms* and *linguograms*); for vowels: *vocograms* (or vowel quadrilaterals) and *labiograms* (some of the last ones are useful for consonants as well). In addition, auditory figures are used for intonation and tones, by means of *tonograms*. When it is necessary or useful, some other types of figures are used, as we will see below.

    We are speaking of *natural phonetics*, since –to put it into practice– nothing is needed except one's own personal abilities and interest for the sounds of *the world's languages*: both languages and dialects, and both accents and variants, as well. The only ‹external› -technological– instrument which is highly useful is a good tape recorder with good earphones, and with a quick, sharp pause button, that is mechanical. This button allows one to interrupt the listening of a recording (and to start it again at once), being able –with practice– to segment each sound, even a short one, into two or three parts, avoiding the running problems of so many electronic pause buttons, which distort and hide whole syllables. Such a tape recorder –for these purposes– is definitely superior to both a video recorder and a ᴄᴅ player, also (and mostly) when they are connected to a computer (with its slow and complex electronic commands).

    On the other hand, all of us have learned our own *mother tongue* perfectly (ie a dialect or a regional variant), even with no need of a tape recorder, since we were of the ideal age and had the necessary motivations to build up a language, in order to be able to communicate with those who were around us. If we did not have a language to use, we would have terrible practical, social, behavioral, and conceptual limitations. After babyhood, it is more complicated to learn *another language*, or *more languages*, also because the new structures rarely coincide with those of our first language, and every kind of interference is always in wait, even between similar languages.

    In this handbook, we will deal with about 1000 fundamental segmental sounds (ie vowels and consonants). Surely, they all exist, since the speakers of the different languages and dialects of the world learn and use them perfectly, although few specialists manage to perceive (and pronounce) them all adequately. But it is more than likely that some more are to be found, when further languages can be analyzed.



    0.8. To produce transcriptions easily using *phonetic fonts*, *Macintosh* computers are the most suitable. With our own *Mac* and *Word 5.1*, and our own Italian extended keyboard (= *qzerty* and, above all, *jklmù*!, by carefully avoiding the *Italy Pro* soft keyboard) we can obtain at least four symbols for each key. For instance, using our own *SimonCani* font, we immediately obtain [a, ɑ, ɐ, ᴀ, ] (by simply typing on the *lower-* and *upper-case* keys, with the addition of the *option*, *option+shift*, and *option+caps* keys), for 221 total signs for each font element/style (ie roman, *italics*, **bold**, and ***bold italics***). This is done without having to perform complex acrobatics to *insert symbols* with many clicks of the mouse (but non-Mac users will hardly be able to realize what this statement actually means, since it seems impossible –or even unimaginable– for those who are bound by the absurd limitations of common ᴘᴄ's).

    Unfortunately, the *Windows* operation system (which has cribbed many good things from the Mac) still allows no more than about 100 signs directly from the keyboard, whereas a Mac can give up to 884 signs (for each complete font).



    0.9. Obviously, many people have facilitated the realization of both *NPT*/*HPh* and *HPr*. As it is impossible to mention all of them, we want to thank those who have generously provided advice and suggestions, by reading and commenting one or more chapters of the 36 which form the *two* handbooks (whereas at the beginning only one book was expected to be sufficient). Some people have also indicated some bibliographical materials or provided some of the precious recordings we have used for direct analyses, either for some sections of our descriptions, or for some or many of our phonosyntheses. All advice and suggestions have been considered, obviously by fusing and uniforming them according to our theoretical and practical positions.

    Therefore, we would particularly like to thank *Filippo Tassetto*, as well as Samuele Dovico, and Emanuele Saíu; besides, Paola Barberis, Lidia Costamagna, María Magdalena De Raedemaeker, Floréal Molina, Renato Seibezzi, Maria A. Simionato, Alberto Venturi, and Daniele Vitali. In addition: Lulzim Ajasi, Piera Buono, Alessandra Di Bonaventura, Alessandro Duranti, Elisa Fiorio, Fernando Grasso, Jaime Magos Guerrero, Nikodimos Idris, Vito Matranga, Renzo Miotti, Riccardo Mura, María Emilia Pandolfi, Renato Pinturo, Paolo Piras, Salvatore Riolo, Suzanne Ruelland, Hans Schiessler, Walter Schweikert, Patrizia Siniscalchi, Roberto Taddio, AlfioTorrisi, Geneviève, Yans. We do *not* thank, instead (but without naming names), those who did not keep their alluring promises to provide good recordings…

    Lastly, we ‹conditionally› thank those who continue mentioning the… first editions of our books, although more up-to-date editions exist. For instance, the third edition of *Italiano standard e pronunce regionali* (1986) has 43% more material than its first edition (of 1980). Whereas the first edition of the *Manuale di pronuncia italiana* (1992) had little more than 400 pages, the second edition (of 1999) contains 282% more divided into two volumes of about 1200 total pages: the new *Manuale di pronuncia italiana* (proper, *MᵅPI*, which contains a thorough and up-to-date description of regional pronunciations as well, although they are not explicitly mentioned, not even in the amended version of 2004). The second volume is the *Dizionario di pronuncia italiana* (*DⁱPI*).

    Toavoid further ambiguities, we would like everyone to know that the 60,000 forms given in the *Dizionario* are all chosen and listed for pronunciation purposes, having excluded those which cannot raise doubts, such as cane, gatto, *rifare*, *irrigidirsi*, *opportunità*… Equally, we have excluded any inﬂected forms which pose no problems, and also those which can be derived by the combination of endings, although with orthoepic relevance (but they are all dealt with in Ch 4, for a better and pondered usage and to save space).

    Therefore, although it is difficult to calculate precisely, we can say that the ‹real› forms provided in the *DⁱPI* are certainly not less than 180,000…

    Still more conditionally, we ‹thank› those who mention our works to demonstrate different (when not opposite) things, compared to what we have actually written or transcribed…

    From a graphic point of view, *NPT*/*HPh* is rather complex, both for the very many figures and for its transcriptions. *HPr* has very many transcriptions (including about 75 of Aesop's passage *The North Wind and the Sun*), in addition to many figures. We have done our best to avoid mistakes and misprints…

    0.10. It is important to remember that when we criticize pure phonologists or pure acoustic phoneticians, we do not mean that their work is of no use at all. Of course, they are free to do what they want (or what they can). We would just like young and unprepared readers not to be made to believe that doing descriptive phonetics is something out-of-date, useless, or unscientific.

    On the contrary, it is often fundamental –and proper– to rebel against what some ‹cultural lobbies› want to make people think about many things, trying to eliminate any currents which happen to be different from theirs. This is true freedom indeed.

    Finally, it is a must to fiercely rebel against those who do descriptive phonetics in a very generic and worthless way, by using approximate and ambiguous terminology and symbols, as well. However, those who only do phonology, or acoustic phonetics, limit themselves to simply *thinking* of sounds, or *seeing* them. In fact, they prevent themselves from really *listen* to actual sounds. And, after all, sounds are *sounds*!

    0.11. Lastly, we would like to end with a *call* –which is issued to all those who are interested in the five lines of phonetic research (that we will mention shortly)– to contact the present writer, in order to see whether we can carry out some kind of fruitful collaboration.

    The five lines of research are:

    (ᴀ) the description of *neutral* and *socio-regional* accents (of native speakers all over the world) for English, French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Netherlandic [ie Dutch and Flemish], Greek (and, perhaps, other languages, such as Russian, Turkish, Arabic, Hindi, Chinese, Japanese). For Spanish alone, all the nations of Central and Southern America have to be thoroughly analyzed…

    (ʙ) the description of foreign accents of English, Italian, French, German, Spanish, Portuguese (in particular those of immigration, from eastern Europe; northern, western, and eastern Africa; southern Asia, from the West to the East);

    (ᴄ) the *expansion* of the *phonosyntheses* to transform them into real descriptions, with all the necessary integrations and examples, as we have done in the 12 chapters of *HPr*;

    (ᴅ) the *increase* of the number of *phonosyntheses* by adding other languages, especially from the most distant and still lesser known areas of the world;

    (ᴇ) the preparation of *pronouncing dictionaries* using *IPA* (ie phonemic transcriptions, but with an appropriate phonetic introduction as well, using ᶜᵅⁿIPA, with vocograms, orograms, tonograms, &c) to start with Spanish, Portuguese, Greek, Russian, Turkish, Arabic, Hindi, Chinese, Japanese, Vietnamese, Indonesian, &c. It would be sufficient for some native speakers, interested in the pronunciation of their own languages, to start the ‹enterprise›, guided by us, in order to continue alone. The most important thing is for people to begin to try hard. However,useless and confused ‹orthographic transcriptions› are to be avoided, although integrated by some diacritics or special signs, because they disguise any phonetic reality and are only misleading even for native speakers…

| LuCa<br/>University of Venice, Italy <br/>Dept. of Speech Sciences <br/>Phonetics and Phonology <br/>19 January 2007 |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

    *Natural phoneticsis* dealt with in our website, for updates, reﬂections, anticipations, and to spread the importance of *articulatory*, *auditory*, and *functional* phonetics, that is natural phonetics. The site is also meant to ‹talk› with interested readers, through e-mail, for the *call* in § 0.11, too (even for curiosities or errata, and other things): *[website]* – for *ᶜᵅⁿIPA*.



# 
