# 1. Prelude

    1.1. Unfortunately, it is a well-known fact that the traditional orthographies of the languages of the world are, to a greater or lesser degree, deficient in representing the pronunciation of these languages clearly and reliably. As a matter of fact, orthographic symbols do not correspond in a one-to-one manner with distinctive sound units or, at any rate, they do not correspond well now. Even languages like English and French, which have a very high level of *non-correspondence* between writing and pronunciation (especially, but not exclusively, in regard to the vowels), had, centuries ago, a much greater degree of correspondence. Their situation was roughly similar to that of modern Italian, or Spanish, which are in any case far from perfection (which would entail rendering the pronunciation, including the position of stress, completely deducible from the orthography).

    The lack of correspondence is primarily due to the fact that the pronunciation of languages changes with the passage of time (and in the case of English and French, it has changed quite a bit in the last half millennium). On the other hand, writing systems have always been extremely *conservative*, and in the case of the European national languages have remained more or less fixed since the time of the first great literary works in those languages.

    1.2. For example, in the time of Chaucer (14th century), the English words *seed, name*, and *night*, which today are pronounced /ˈsɪid, ˈnɛɪm, ˈnaɛt/ [ˈsɪˈi̥, ˈnᴇˑɪm, ˈnaɘ], were then pronounced /ˈseːd, ˈnaːmə, ˈnɪçt/. English has reached extreme cases of non-correspondence, including ones where the same phoneme is represented in many different ways. For example, /ɪi/ in: *green, eve, mean, field, seize, key, police, people, aeon, quay*. Conversely, a single letter combination can represent various pronunciations: for example, *gh* in: *ghost* /ɡ/, *hough* /k/, *hiccough* /p/, *enough* /f/, *Edinburgh* /ə/, *though* /Ø/ (‹zero›).

    As was mentioned above, the Italian writing system does not arrive at excesses like those exemplified above. However, it does not give much information on the pronunciation of *e, o* (/e, ɛ; o, ɔ/), nor on that of *s* (/s, z/), or *z* (/ts, dz/). It is also deficient in showing where words are stressed, and this confusion is the cause of notable oscillations and ‹idiosyncratic› stress positions. In Italian (as in English and French), there are, moreover, inconvenient cases of etymological ‹conservation› of ‹silent letters› (often inserted by purists even where they had never been pronounced, such as English *doubt* /ˈdaɔt/, once written *dout*, but with the *b* added later because it had been present in Latin - *dubitare*). English *science* (from Latin *scientia[m]*) is /ˈsaɛəns/, while in Italian we have *scienza* /ˈʃɛntsa/.

## Transcriptions

    1.3. In order to analyze the pronunciation of a language, for learning and teaching purposes, it is necessary to use two different types of transcriptions: *phonetic* and *phonemic* (or *phonological*).

    It is important for both of these to be derived more from *interlinguistic* strategies (considering several languages) than from *intralinguistic* considerations (working within just one language). As a matter of fact, an ɪɴᴛʀᴀʟɪɴɢᴜɪsᴛɪᴄ transcription is designed only for the needs of a particular language, and usually, only for native speakers of that language. The result is a transcription which is merely phonemic and not convenient for comparisons with other languages. This type of transcription is, however, completely legitimate when there is no intention of relating the transcriptions to the pronunciation of other languages. In these cases, it is even possible to use extremely vague symbols as long as each phoneme is distinguished from all the others.

    Therefore, in theory, it could be acceptable to represent Italian diphthongs such as [ai, au] by ‹/aj, aw/›, while representing the sequences [ja, wa] with /iá, uá/. In English, it would be possible to transcribe the diphthongs [ɪi, ᴇɪ, aɘ, σɘ, a, ɜɷ/σɷ, μu/ʊu] as ‹/iː, eː, ai, oi, au, oː, uː/› (or even ‹ij, ej, aj, oj, aw, ow, uw›, as not a few do). According to the ‹logic› of this last case, even the German diphthongs ([ae, ao, ɔʏ]) could be represented by ‹aj, aw, oj› without problems.

    However, it immediately becomes clear that for descriptive and teaching purposes, transcriptions such as ‹/aj, aw/› are definitely unfaithful and also rather misleading, respect to different realizations such as the Spanish or Italian [ai, au] (with the second vocalic elements in each diphthong quite high), the English [aɘ, a] (with the second elements much lower and centralized), and the German [ae, ao] (with the second elements lower as well, but not centralized).

In the case of the German ‹oj›, there would be the additional problem of ignoring or hiding the fact that even the second element, in neutral pronunciation, is rounded (and also not completely high nor front): [ɔʏ]. In English, we should hope that one day not only [ᴇɪ, ɜɷ/σɷ], but also [ɪi, μu/ʊu], are diphthongs will once and for all be evident to everyone (the variants after the slash are American).

    1.4. The most useful *phonetic transcriptions* are ᴛᴀxᴏᴘʜᴏɴɪᴄ – ie, which use all available symbols for phones (vocoids and contoids) and for prosodic elements, in an effort to show clearly every necessary nuance. Only in this way is it possible to make truly useful comparisons between different pronunciations (of different languages, or different pronunciations of the same language depending upon geographical or social differences). Otherwise, everything becomes vague and consequently less productive – one can believe the result is useful work, but more often this belief is only a mirage.

    For teaching and learning pronunciation well, simplifying matters excessively ‹in order to put things on the students’ level› is also detrimental. For example, when English phoneticians continue to use [ə] even in more precise transcriptions (often with extensive use of diacritics) for every case of /ə/ (and /əʊ/) they lose the opportunity to show *reality*. Thus the neutral British pronunciation of *to go*, *the man*, *further* is often given as ⟨[tə'ɡəʊ, ðə'mæn, 'fɜːðɐ] (or ['fəːðə])⟩, instead of the actual [h'ɡɜˑɷ, ðə'mæˑn, 'fɜːðɐ] (cf Ch 2 in *HPr*). The same occurs with ⟨[iː, uː]⟩ instead of [ɪi, μu/ʊu] (mentioned in various parts of the book).

    Therefore, particularly for those who deal with several languages at once, but also for those who use a single foreign language, the best choice is *interphonemic* transcriptions, since these ones are the least arbitrary in their use of symbols. These transcriptions do not level out phonetic reality, rather, they emphasize similarities and differences, thereby representing much more faithfully the relationships between different languages and pronunciations. For example, in Japanese it is definitely better to use /ɯ/ rather than /u/, even though there is no chance of confusing them (since Japanese has no /u/) – the use of /ɯ/ makes the differences between Japanese and other languages quite clear.

    ᴅɪᴀᴘʜᴏɴᴇᴍɪᴄ transcriptions are also important. They are based on an *interphonemic* foundation (among different languages), although it is also possible to work with an *intraphonemic* foundation (within one single language), with, however, the defects implicit therein. ᴅɪᴀᴘʜᴏɴᴇᴍᴇꜱ (from *dia-* ‹distinction›) are a fundamental tool for transcribing, simultaneously, partially different accents of the same language, since they remind the reader of differences of pronunciation, while making it possible to show, in a single transcription type, systematic variations (without having to repeat the same words and change the symbols in the parts which differ from a phonetic point of view). In this way, for example, /ʊu, ɔu/ can be used to represent at the same time [μʊ, ɜɷ] (British), and [ʊu, σɷ] (American); *two* /'tʊu/ ['hμˑu, 'hʊˑu], *go* /'ɡɔʊ/ ['ɡɜˑɷ, 'ɡσˑʊ]. Similarly, /æˑ/ for [ɑː] (Br.) and [æ] (Am.): *last* /'læˑst/ ['lɑˑs, ˑlæs], or /ɒˑ/ for [ɒ] (Br.) and [ɔː] (Am.): *lost* /'lɒˑst/ ['lɒs, 'lɔˑs]; or, /ṭ, ɹ̣/ in /lɛṭəɹ̣/ for ['lᴇɐ] (Br.) or ['lᴇɿɹ̩] (Am.).


